*People are Plants*<sup>4</sup>

“I consider a tree. I can look on it as a picture : stiff column in a shock of light, or splash, of green shot with the delicate blue and silver of the background. I can perceive it as movement : flowing veins on clinging, pressing pith, suck of the roots, breathing of the leaves, ceaseless commerce with earth and air — and the obscure growth itself. I can classify it in a species and study it as a type in its structure and mode of life. I can subdue its actual presence and form so sternly that I recognize it only as an expression of law — of the laws in accordance with which a constant opposition of forces is continually adjusted, or of those in accordance with which the component substances mingle and separate. I can dissipate it and perpetuate it in number, in pure numerical relation. In this the tree remains my object, occupies space and time, and has its nature and constitution. It can, however, also come about, if I have both will and grace, that in considering the tree I become bound up in relation to it. The tree is now no longer It I have been seized by the power of exclusiveness. To effect this it is not necessary for me to give up any of the ways in which I consider the tree. There is nothing from which I would have to turn my eyes away in order to see, and no knowledge that I would have to forget. Rather is everything, picture and movement, species and type, law and number, indivisibly united in this event. Everything belonging to the tree is in this: its form and structure, its colours and chemical composition, its intercourse with the elements and with the stars, are all present in a single whole. The tree is no impression, no play of my imagination, no value depending on my mood; but it is bodied over against me and has to do with me, as I with it — only in a different way. Let no attempt be made to sap the strength from the meaning of the relation: relation is mutual. The tree will have a consciousness, then, similar to our own. Of that I have no experience. But do you wish, through seeming to succeed in it with yourself, once again to disintegrate that which cannot be disintegrated. I encounter no soul or dryad of the tree, but the tree itself.”<sup>1</sup>

“But even the ecology movement is, in the main, influenced by the Great Chain as it stands. It is common for us to hear that we should save the whale because it is such a noble animal, or that it would be a great loss for the majestic Siberian tiger or the indomitable bald eagle to become extinct. These adjectives — “noble,” “majestic,” and so on — indicate that we are being asked to preserve these animals because they are higher and therefore better. Such arguments are persuasive because they depend upon the cultural model of the Great Chain. It is much harder to persuade people that it would be terrible to lose the lovely snail darter, because the snail darter’s position in the Great Chain makes it culturally insignificant.
	For whatever reason, perhaps because in our early cognitive development we inevitable form the model of the basic Great Chain as we interact with the world, it seems that the Great Chain is widespread and has strong natural appeal. This is frightening. It implies that those social, political, and ecological evils induced by the Great Chain will not disappear quickly or easily or of their own accord.
	The Great Chain is a political issue. As a chain of dominance, it can become a chain of subjugation. It extends over centuries, linking the causes of anti colonial Americans and antiroyalist French to those still bound by it — from Blacks to women to Untouchables to aborigines the environment, from whales and eagles to snails and species of lettuce, to the integrity of rivers.”<sup>2</sup>

“Stretched out at full length upon my bed, in an attitude so natural that no art could have designed it, she reminded me of a long blossoming stem that had been laid there, and so indeed she was: the faculty of dreaming which I possessed only in her absence I recovered at such moments in her presence, as though by falling asleep she had become a plant. In this way her sleep did to a certain extent make love possible. When she was present, I spoke to her, but I was too far absent from myself to be able to think. When she was asleep, I no longer needed to talk to her, I knew that she was no longer looking at me, I had no longer any need to live upon my own outer surface.
	By shutting her eyes, by losing consciousness, Albertine had stripped off, one after another, the different human characters with which she had deceived me ever since the day when I had first made her acquaintance. She was animated now only by the unconscious life of vegetation, of trees, a life more different from my own, more alien, and yet one that belonged more to me. Her personality did not escape at every moment, as when we were talking, by the channels of her unacknowledged thoughts and of her gaze. She had called back into herself everything of her that lay outside, had taken refuge, enclosed, reabsorbed, in her body. In keeping her before my eyes, in my hands, I had that impression of possessing her altogether, which I never had when she was awake. Her life was submitted to me, exhaled towards me its gentle breath.
	I listened to this murmuring, mysterious emanation, soft as a breeze from the sea, fairylike as that moonlight which was her sleep. So long as it lasted, I was free to think about her and at the same time to look at her, and, when her sleep grew deeper, to touch, to kiss her. What I felt then was love in the presence of something as pure, as immaterial in its feelings, as mysterious, as if I had been in the presence of those inanimate creatures which are the beauties of nature. And indeed, as soon as her sleep became at all heavy, she ceased to be merely the plant that she had been; her sleep, on the margin of which I remained musing, with a fresh delight of which I never tired, but could have gone on enjoying indefinitely, was to me an undiscovered country. Her sleep brought within my reach something as calm, as sensually delicious as those nights of full moon on the bay of Balbec, turned quiet as a lake over which the branches barely stir, where stretched out upon the sand one could listen for hours on end to the waves breaking and receding.”<sup>3</sup>

1. Buber *I and Thou* trans. Walter Kaufmann
2. Layoff and Turner *More than Cool Reason A Field Guide to Poetic Metaphor*
3. Proust *The Captive* trans. C. K. Scott Moncrieff
4. *This is both the title and structure to my reading and argument.*
