# INTEGBI  290 - 375  Research Seminar
Spring 2019. Course number 12334. Tentatively scheduled on Wednesdays 11AM-12PM. 1-2 units.

## Botanical Survey

**Instructor of Record:** Carl Rothfels;
**Office:** 1084 VLSB, in the Herbarium;
**e-mail:** via bcourses;
**Office Hours:** by appointment

**Co-instructors:** Caleb Caswell-Levy and Mick Song; **e-mail:** via bcourses; **Office Hours:** by appointment

**Supplemental Text:** Simpson, M. G. 2019. [*Plant Systematics.*](https://www.elsevier.com/books/plant-systematics/simpson/978-0-12-812628-8) Elsevier/Academic Press.

**Course description and goals:**

This will be a clade-based seminar course: each participant will be responsible
(individually, or in small groups, depending on the number of students enrolled) for preparing a
selection of herbarium or live specimens and an introductory presentation of the morphology,
natural history, taxonomy, and systematics of a clade of their interest—a hands-on, show-and-tell
style class discussion (possibly with keying activities, and culinary or ethnobotanical
experiences). The instructors will work with the herbarium and UCMP to allow students access
to most of the museum material and will then take a backseat to their expertise, though they will
lead a couple discussions themselves. The level of the material covered will thus be largely
driven by the students taking the course, but we anticipate focusing mostly on mosses, ferns, and
lichens. For the purposes of the class, plants will be loosely defined as those organisms treated
by the International Code of Nomenclature for algae, fungi, and plants so lichenologists,
mycologists, phycologists, and Friends of the Jepson Herbarium are welcome, as well as any
student generally interested in plants.

**Grading:**
Attendance is optional but recommended. Pass-no pass.

**Course Schedule (a work in progress):**

| Date                   | Presenter | Plant | References |
|------------------------|-----------|-------|------------|
| 23 Jan. 2019 Wednesday | Carrie T. |Bomarea| *example*  |
| 30 Jan. 2019 Wednesday | Carl  R.  |Ferns  | *example*  |
|                        |           |       |            |
|                        |           |       |            |
|                        |           |       |            |
|                        |           |       |            |
|                        |           |       |            |
|                        |           |       |            |
|                        |           |       |            |
|                        |           |       |            |
|                        |           |       |            |
|                        |           |       |            |
|                        |           |       |            |

**Updated List of Resources Provided by Presenters**

1. [FernBase](https://www.fernbase.org/)

**Photos of Plants**

*coming soon*
