---
layout: post
title: "Statement of Teaching Philosophy"
date: 2019-03-02
---

>> Engaged pedagogy does not seek simply to empower students. Any classroom that employs a holistic model of learning will also be a place where teachers grow, and are empowered by the process. - bell hooks

It is not lost on students the imperial nature of both the classroom (what they are being taught) and the university (how this thought is made meaningful in society). If students are thinking (and they are!) that the education they receive is meaningless other than as means to progress through society, then they will both not learn the material well and also necessarily resign themselves to being complicit in a system which at best disempowers them on their journey to knowledge and at worst actively oppresses them and their communities.

However, the material we teach is not necessarily meaningless, though these students are correct that they have no inherent worth. It is our job as teachers to make what we are teaching meaningful for the students in a way that generates useful knowledges in the classroom, which could then lead to a university that can achieve that lofty goal of liberation through education.

While feminist, decolonized, and critical pedagogies have made great strides in teaching students in the humanities, it is a somewhat different task in STEM disciplines as these fields are deeply integrated into the military-industrial-healthcare complex and the education system at every level is somewhat structured as a pipeline towards capitalist production. In my field of organismal biology, this is the creation of doctors and healthcare professionals. 

I have taught college students every semester for three years now, in both introductory biology courses and upper division courses on evolution and botany, at a state university which although does not represent the diversity of California (Black and Latinx students are systematically marginalized) is nonetheless a school which spans the spectrum of race, class and gender in the classroom. What I have found is that very very few students are actually passionate about medicine or biology and that a culture of fear and shame prevents students from exploring what they are interested in learning. Not only do they then struggle to learn what they are not passionate about, but they recreate a bleak structure of competition that is recapitulated in many of the STEM professions. 

This was vastly different from my experience studying biology at a small private elite liberal arts college, Reed College, where I learned to love the field of evolutionary biology and became passionate about research. This is complicated by class. Becoming a medical doctor was mocked as being too practical and not academic enough by the vast majority of faculty and students, very few of which saw social mobility as important or necessary or liberatory. Instead, our biology curriculum was integrated with a ambitious yet homogenizing and Eurocentric project of classical studies, languages, humanities, arts and mathematics, that all students were required to take. Theses classes constituted more classes than my major and it was in these non-biology classes that I discovered my love of learning and love of biology.

My struggle with teaching is reconciling what felt liberatory in my privileged liberal arts education with the struggles of a diverse group of students that have many more complex considerations when pursuing education than “knowledge for knowledge sake.” However, the solution comes easily when you follow what the students are saying, listen to their concerns, and create a space where people can feel safe sharing not only their ideas, but their fears and dreams for the future. When they are learning things for their own sake, you as the teacher get the exciting exercise of helping guide their journey to knowledges that can be helpful and interesting for them, but also that which you want them to learn.

In practice, to do this there must be  a conducive environment within the university and department and hard work from the teacher.

### The role of the university
The university functions best when academics have the freedom to teach their own material, design their own syllabi, and conduct their own classes without supervision or control of the administration. This is of course not how it is done, but I think that the creation of classes and FTEs as subject to market demands is inherently antithetical to the ethos of learning. Also, small class sizes is hugely important.

### The role of the teacher
The teacher must not police thought, nor be an authority, but an equal. The courses should be designed to promote questioning, critical thinking, and development of reading and writing skills, not the learning of facts or punitive testing. If tests are to be given, they should be open-book and open-time and be fun and challenging (such is done at Reed College). Importantly, time must be taken to talk about life and about the class in and out of class. Students must be critical about their education and question it and so should a good teacher. This will help the teacher reassess and develop better more relevant, or less racist (see narratives around “discovery” or eugenics still taught in evolution classes around the country) material. Likewise, talking about life with the students will help the teacher learn about the struggles that affect learning. The teacher must accommodate such impediments to learning and offer the support that they can. We play complex roles and acknowledging that is important. In summary, we must be servants to the people and use what we have learned to help others while developing the critical apparatuses needed for their and our own liberation. 
